Go to the translated article April 19, 2016 Ottawa, Ontario CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Good afternoon everyone. It’s my absolute pleasure to be here. You know, when I was asked to be a part of this event, I thought a lot about what I wanted to say. I thought we could talk about the importance of getting young people engaged in the political process – but I’m pretty sure you know how I feel about that. Or about how grassroots movements can be amazing catalysts for change – but again, I’m a fairly open book when it comes to that stuff. Ultimately, I decided that I wanted to talk to you today not as your Prime Minister, but as your Minister of Youth. Which is the portfolio I assigned myself, by the way. I wanted to take on that extra responsibility because the challenges young people face have always been important to me, whether as a teacher or a volunteer or a politician. Youth issues are Canada’s issues. There is no separating the two. Now, I know that when people are cynical about politics – both young and old – they tend to have the same complaint. They say that politicians are “all talk and no action.” Well, this is a lecture and Q&A format. That means that I’m going to have to do some talking. But what I want to focus on today are the actions that our government is taking to invest in Canada’s youth. Specifically, I want to touch on empowering young Canadians, on what we’re doing to help young Canadians get good jobs and work experience, and on the importance of equality and inclusion. There’s no question that young Canadians are interested in politics. This room proves it. And so does the ballot box. In the last election, Statistics Canada found that 18-24 year olds reported voting at a rate 12 percent higher than the previous election. And that figure could rise even higher next time, if we put in the work needed to help young people feel empowered and engaged. In the next election in 2019, there will be 1.5 million first-time voters. We need to make sure that these future voters – now students in high school – are given an active role in the decision-making processes that will fundamentally shape their lives. So, what does that really mean? What does it look like in practice? Well, as Minister of Youth, it will be my job to make sure that Cabinet considers items from the perspective of young Canadians. And I’ll support my Cabinet colleagues in applying that same lens to the work that their ministry undertakes. To keep me up to speed on the issues that matter most to young Canadians, I’ll be launching the Youth Advisory Council made up of Canadians aged 16 to 24. And to make sure that young Canadians think about meaningful careers in government, we will work to modernize the public service. You have so much to give, and your voices and perspectives are needed like never before. Your goals, your hopes, and your dreams for a better life will inform every decision this government makes. That is my promise to you. When it comes to getting good jobs and work experience, there’s a familiar refrain among young people. I hear it in every community I visit. Young people tell me that they can’t get a job because they don’t have any work experience, and they can’t get any work experience because they don’t have a job. It’s a vicious circle. And our new government is taking steps to help break it. We’re establishing an expert panel on youth employment to assess the barriers that vulnerable youth face in finding and keeping jobs. We need to better understand those challenges. At the same time, we know that you need help now, not months or years from now. That’s why last month’s budget included real measures to address youth unemployment and underemployment, and real help for young people seeking their first jobs. That work starts in the classroom. To start, we’re investing in actual classrooms. Over the next 3 years, we’ll be investing $2 billion in labs and buildings on college and university campuses. But perhaps more important, we’re investing in students – so that when young people go off to school, they can afford to stay in school. In Canada, every young person should have the opportunity to go to university or college. It shouldn’t matter where you were born, or how much money your parents make. We took real steps toward making that a reality with Budget 2016. We’ll boost Canada Student Grants by up to $1,000 per year for postsecondary students from low and middle income families. This means more money in the pockets of 360,000 students each and every year. And our budget also includes more help for recent graduates. Beginning later this fiscal year, no student graduating from college or university will have to start paying back their Canada Student Loans until they are earning at least $25,000 per year. This will help young people as they transition into work, giving them a bit of a break until they land on their feet. We’ll also support young people through significant new investments in skills training. Previously, the Government of Canada was spending $330 million per year on youth employment. This year, we will invest almost twice that. These are just a few of the things we have planned to help students and new workers transition to meaningful, well-paying work. Investing in young Canadians is a smart bet. I’m confident of that because I’ve seen what you’re capable of. I’m reminded almost daily of your unparalleled empathy for others, and of your genuine commitment to equality and inclusion. I have often said that Canada is a country that is strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them. This is true of Canada’s young people, and it is especially true of Indigenous youth. We have a lot of work to do to make sure that all young people in Canada enjoy equal treatment and equal opportunity. This work won’t be easy. Things that matter seldom are. But I’m confident that if Canada and its Indigenous partners work together on a nation-to-nation basis, we can and we will ensure that Indigenous youth have a strong voice in shaping their futures. For our part, the government will invest $2.6 billion over the next five years in primary and secondary education on reserves, to help First Nations students learn and succeed. Every child deserves a quality education. Equality and inclusion matters – no matter your background, no matter where you live. Those are the principles that will guide the decisions we make as a government. When I look at the students here today, I feel proud, and confident, and frankly, I feel reassured. You are the most educated, most connected, and most diverse generation that this country has ever seen. You shape your communities in ways that couldn’t have been imagined even 20 years ago when I was in school. I was in the first class at McGill where everyone was given an email address, and it had more numbers in it than my CEGEP math textbook. But for you, technology is an asset, innovation is second nature, diversity is a source of strength, and collaboration is the expectation. You are the leaders, not of tomorrow – but of today. Never forget this. What you do, what you say, and the choices you make have the power to change the world. Young people have long demanded more from their elected representatives and I’m here to tell you that our government expects no less of you. We need your help. Tell us your concerns. Keep us focused. And expect more than talk – demand action. My friends, this is a collaboration. Together, we’ll create a future that we can be proud of for generations to come. Thank you.