Go to the translated article September 24, 2018 New York, New York CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Nelson Mandela’s message of peace was rooted in the conviction that we are part of the same community. That our fate is tied to that of our fellow citizens. He famously held that “to be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others.” Made an honorary Canadian in 2001, his example touched the lives of millions, defying both time and place. Former Prime Ministers Mulroney and Clark were among the many Canadians who firmly opposed the Apartheid regime, pressing world leaders and international forums. I remember the profound impact he had on my father, who greatly admired his character and his relentless fight for justice. They actually spoke at length about this when they met in the 90s. From the dock of the defendant to the confines of Robben Island to the floor of the United Nations, Nelson Mandela always appealed to our common humanity. That must be the foundation of any lasting peace. 100 years after his birth, it is fitting that Madiba be remembered here, by leaders of all nations. Leaders who recognize that their challenges are shared. Leaders who, despite their differences, harbour the same hopes for their countries – the same dreams of peace, prosperity, and opportunity for their people. That is not to say that our solidarity is unquestioned and unshaken. Armed conflict, emerging threats, a changing climate – all have tested the strength of our commitment and the bounds of our compassion. In times like these, we must remember the example of Nelson Mandela, who believed that we should not despair, for our troubles only bear witness to a job unfinished. As we pay tribute to the legacy of Nelson Mandela, Canada reaffirms its resolve to push forward the work he began. Canada will continue to call out the unfair treatment of racial and ethnic minorities, of women and girls, of Indigenous peoples. We will continue to speak up for the refugees of Rohingya, for the Yazidis of Northern Iraq, for the people of Venezuela. Canada will always stand tall for democracy, the rule of law, and human rights at home and abroad. Peace is the work of many generations. Madiba took up the cause of peace and it is now up to us to keep carrying the torch forward. The flames of his ideals must live on in each and every one of us.