Go to the translated article October 23, 2018 Toronto, Ontario CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Hello, everyone. Thank you for being here today. President Whitaker – it’s great to see you. It’s always a pleasure to visit students and staff at Humber College, and hear about the great work happening on campus. And it’s even better when I’m joined by friends and colleagues like: Catherine McKenna, Minister of the Environment and Climate Change. Bill Morneau, Minister of Finance. And Kirsty Duncan, Minister of Science and Sport, who is also the proud MP right here in Etobicoke North. My friends, I'm here to talk to you about something that you think about all the time: your future. As students, you probably spend a decent amount of time wondering what kind of job you're going to have, what kind of community you're going to live in, what kind of country you're going to inherit. Well, I want to talk about an issue that will shape your generation's future more than any other: climate change, and what's at stake for you in the next few months as we debate whether to finally do something real about it. I don't need to tell you how important this is – you see what’s happening all around you. Extreme weather events are becoming more frequent in number, more expensive to clean up, and more devastating for Canadian communities. We see climate change in loss of habitat, species extinction, poorer air quality, easier disease transmission, and forced migration for millions of people around the world. You haven’t known a year in your life when this wasn’t being discussed. We only need to open our eyes to see that our environment is changing in unprecedented and alarming ways. And we have known that human activity is causing these changes. We've known for a long time that we have polluted our planet too much, and the consequences have grown more obvious and more serious. So the very real question we have to face, as a country, is this: Will we ignore what’s right in front of us, or will we act? Will we kick this can down the road, yet again – to be dealt with in another place and at another time – or will we show some courage and do what needs to be done? For this generation, and the next. In recent years, we've seen floods from downtown Toronto to Cape Breton Island, while in my hometown of Montréal, more than 50 people died from a heat wave just a few months ago. Spring in Manitoba brought with it the worst drought on record, sending feed prices through the roof for farmers. And it seems like once a season we hear reference to “the storm of the century.” Two years ago, we had a wildfire in northern Alberta that almost wiped Fort McMurray off the map. And at our Cabinet meeting in Nanaimo this summer, you could barely see the sun at noon through the smoke from forest fires. But you know all this. You’ve seen the news, and the stories are all too familiar. It is the world you were born into, and you know no other. It is the air that you breathe. But let me tell you – it wasn’t always this way, and it doesn’t have to be. This problem exists because your political leaders have done far too little about it. You know that too. And lately, both here and abroad, there seem to be more and more of them who want to do less and less. It's not that we haven't known what to do. Science, and scientists, have been clear. They have been clear about what's happening, and what needs to be done about it. And economists have told us how to make these changes in a way that will grow our economies and position us well for the future. Businesses are already building that economy. Many of you will work for one of them. Or better still, build your own. Both the problem and its solution have been clear for decades. It is free to pollute, so we have too much pollution. We have so much of it, in fact, that the world's leading scientists told us a few weeks ago that we have just 12 years left to make real change. Today’s leaders have a fundamental responsibility to you – young people here at Humber and across the country – and to every generation that will follow you. And here’s the thing: We are the first generation that has known how to fix the problem, but the last generation that can actually do it. Tomorrow, or even later today, I suppose we will hear from those who oppose our plan, and are willing to ignore what’s right in front of us. People who are willing to pass on to you, and to your kids and grandkids, a more severe and expensive problem. Well, I for one refuse to leave this problem to be dealt with by some other person at some other time. We have to deliver a safer, healthier, more prosperous future for Canadians and their families. We can, and we will. And we’re already on our way. To date, and under the leadership of our ministers, we’ve taken some large and important steps to cut greenhouse gas emissions, strengthen our communities, and protect Canadian families. Eliminating coal-fired electricity, building climate smart infrastructure, safeguarding our oceans, and working with industry to tap into the enormous potential across the clean tech sector – these are just a few of the ways we’re preparing for the future, and creating good jobs in the process. And today, we’re taking another big, important step in the fight for a cleaner environment and a better future. So, here's what we're going to do. Starting next year, it will no longer be free to pollute, anywhere in Canada. We are going to place a price on the pollution that causes climate change, from coast to coast to coast. And we are also going to help Canadians adjust to this new reality. After all, people are anxious about the cost of living. It can be hard to make ends meet. That’s why we’ve cut taxes for the middle class, strengthened the Canada Pension Plan, and introduced programs like the Canada Child Benefit for families. And, that’s also why we’re going to help Canadians thrive in a country where pollution is no longer free. Because it's not enough to create a cleaner economy – we have to make sure regular Canadians can afford it. Two years ago, I spoke in the House of Commons about the urgent need to put a price on pollution. And since then, many provinces and territories have risen to the challenge, by either building up their own plan, or choosing ours. Others have chosen not to. And so, we will act. We will implement the national climate plan in the provinces of Ontario, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and New Brunswick. In those four provinces, we will send a Climate Action Incentive directly to Canadians, to help them adjust to an economy in which pollution is no longer free. Here in Ontario, a family of four will get $307 with their tax return this spring. That amount will more than double to $718 by 2022. 8 in 10 Ontario families will get back more than they pay directly. And there will be a 10% top up for people living in small, rural, and remote communities. Through this plan, we will also increase our support for small and medium sized businesses, municipalities, universities, schools, hospitals, non-profit organizations, and Indigenous communities. These investments will be good for the environment, create jobs, and strengthen local economies. Let me be very clear: the Government of Canada will return all of the money collected through pricing pollution back to Canadians. Every nickel will be invested in Canadians, in the province or territory where it was raised. My friends, putting a price on pollution is the best way to tackle climate change – because it works. William Nordhaus, who just won the Nobel Prize for his work on the economic impact of climate change, called British Columbia a model example of pollution pricing done well. And with good reason. In B.C., pollution is down. Jobs and growth are up. And people around the world have caught on. More than half the global economy has a price on pollution now, from China to Europe to California. A pollution price is no longer a radical idea. It’s ambitious, as it should be, but the science and the economics behind it are settled. And the only way to tackle a problem as massive as climate change is for governments and the private sector to work together. Neither of us can do it alone, but together, we can build resilient communities and thriving economies. Economic incentives will drive companies to innovate, develop new and better technology, create jobs, and deliver a cleaner, healthier planet for everyone. And let’s not forget that the global clean-growth market represents a multi-trillion dollar opportunity for the companies and countries that choose to lead it. When it comes to climate change, some people will tell you the problem is complex. That it's hard to explain, and that the solutions are even more complex, and even harder to explain. I think that's an excuse offered by those who, for whatever reason, don't want to act. Maybe it's a politician who smells an opportunity to win a few votes. Maybe it's an investor who sees the chance to make a few short-term bucks. Whatever their reason, the long list of excuses won’t cut it anymore. Here's what one leading scientist said last month when talking about the solution to climate change: “We show it can be done within laws of physics and chemistry. Then the final tick box is political will.” Well, I know that Canadians have that will. I also know that you are counting on us, and we will not let you down. 12 years. About 12 years ago, my wife Sophie and I were just starting a family. We have three kids now. Our eldest, Xavier, turned 11 last week. When I think about what Canada should do to play our role in fighting climate change, I think about your generation, and I think about theirs. This is not about politics or the next election. This is about leadership. It's about seeing this problem and its solution for what it is: a moral and economic imperative to act. Those who think otherwise should be honest with you and explain themselves. If not now, when? If not us, whom? 12 years from now, you will all have some serious questions about the decisions made by political leaders, today. I, for one, intend on giving you a good answer. We can do this, my friends. I promise you. We have to cut pollution, and we have to position our economy for the future. And by working together, we can, and we will, do just that. Thank you.