Go to the translated article April 5, 2020 Ottawa, Ontario CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Hello everyone. Happy Sunday. This morning, I would first like to thank everyone working weekends. Truckers, grocers, pharmacists and health professionals—as always—thank you. But, today, I would also like to thank agricultural workers who feed our families. You are going through particularly tough times. But, thanks to you, we can stay home knowing that we can count on you to feed our families and our communities. We greatly appreciate everything that you are doing for us, and we will be there to support you. Over the past few weeks, we’ve all had to make changes to keep each other safe and healthy, and it’s a big adjustment. While we still have a lot of work to do, we’re making good progress on getting you the support you need as quickly as possible. And that’s what I want to start with today. Earlier this week, we announced more details on how you can access the Canada Emergency Response Benefit if you’ve lost your job or your paycheque. Starting tomorrow, you’ll be able to sign up to receive this support by going to Canada.ca. If you choose direct deposit, you will get a first payment within 3 to 5 days. If you choose to receive your benefit by mail, you’ll get money within the next 10 days. I know it can be hard to keep your spirits up these days. But one thing that should give us all hope is the way we’ve come together as a country. Crises such as this one test the limits of our solidarity. And in these difficult times, we’ve seen businesses step up to help protect our health care workers. We’ve seen doctors and nurses come out of retirement. We’ve seen people raise money for local food banks, check on their friends, and help our most vulnerable. Many of you may be wondering how you can help, and I want to remind you that the very best thing you can do to fight this pandemic is to follow public health recommendations. Wash your hands and stay at home, except for critical things like getting groceries or medications and try to make that trip only once a week. And if you do have to go out, keep a safe distance of at least 2 metres from others. That’s how you can keep doing your part. But for those of you with specialized skills looking to help our frontline workers, we do want to hear from you. Health Canada is building an inventory of specialized volunteers that provinces and territories can draw on to provide more support to our health care workers. This could include tracking cases and tracing contact, as well as collecting and reporting data. If you can help, please sign up online at Canada.ca/coronavirus. Applications will be open until April 24. We’re also offering full-time jobs to all reservists in the Canadian Forces. We’re contacting reservists across the country to see if they are interested and offering them the same pay and benefits as regular-force personnel for the coming months. Bolstering the military’s ranks will help offset some of the economic consequences of COVID-19 and ensure that our communities are well supported. In this crisis, everything you do counts. If you refuse to follow the experts’ advice, you are not just endangering your own life or that of your loved ones. You are endangering the health of all members of society. I’m not saying this to be dramatic. 233 Canadians have lost their lives because of COVID-19 and hundreds of families are now in mourning. I would like to extend my deepest sympathies to all bereaved families. We are going through these difficult times together. We are here for you. To overcome this crisis, we all need to be aware of the consequences of our actions. If you do not do your part, your fellow citizens will pay the price. But it also works the other way. If you follow the experts’ advice, your whole community will benefit. So, let’s focus on doing just that. Let’s continue to do our part. That is how we will get through this challenge, together. And I want to close today with a message for kids. Thank you all for sending me your questions over the past few days. Dr. Tam and I had a great time answering those questions this morning. Later today, astronauts Jeremy Hansen and David St-Jacques will be on YouTube, so be sure to tune in. David just returned to Earth after spending many months in space and he knows a thing or two about staying indoors and only talking to friends and family via video conference. I know these are tough times for kids and young people right across the country, and indeed around the world, but know that the support you’re giving your parents and all of us as we work through this, the way you’re helping out, the way you’re focusing on doing your homework and keeping your school work up, and the way you’re learning to adapt to this new situation that we will all remember for the rest of our lives. Thank you for everything you guys are doing to keep us getting through this. Thank you very much, everyone.