We have heard clearly today how the situation in South Sudan is deteriorating and requires coordinated international attention and pressure. Today, I will address three key elements. Firstly, the worsening security situation, then the imperative for humanitarian access, and thirdly, the practical steps towards a political process to peace. First, the United Kingdom condemns the recent escalating military offensives across South Sudan since last March, including attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. We condemn reported ethnically-based hate speech and reported increased recruitment and use of child soldiers, reminiscent of the worst days of the civil war. We urge all parties to comply with international humanitarian law, including for the protection of civilians, and reiterate our call for an immediate cessation of hostilities. The UK also joins the Secretary-General’s calls for the safety and security of UN personnel, following the appalling killing of an UNMISS staff member in Wau in December. We express our deepest condolences. Second, it is critical that life-saving humanitarian support can reach the millions needing assistance. We are particularly concerned at the situation in Jonglei, where violence has displaced around 230,000 people since December. The 3 February airstrike on a Médecins Sans Frontières hospital is unacceptable, as is the large-scale looting of a convoy carrying aid for 73,000 people in Upper Nile State between 31 January and 1 February. We reiterate our call on the transitional government to ensure unhindered humanitarian access to all areas, irrespective of political affiliation or ethnicity. Third, it is critical that the parties return to the peace agreement. We urge the transitional government to cease proposing its unilateral amendments to the peace agreement and its removal of opposition officials. We also express concern at the creation of parallel governance structures which are impacting aid and delivery. The Revitalised Agreement is critical to providing peace to South Sudan, especially through a power-sharing Government. The actions of President Kiir’s regime are undermining this. The UK joins the African Union and IGAD in urging all parties to recommit to inclusive, consensus‑driven dialogue to prevent the slide back into full-scale civil war.