Go to the translated article April 9, 2017 Vimy Ridge, France CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Consider: The price they paid.

Seven thousand and four Canadians were wounded in the battle that began here, 100 years ago today.

Three thousand, five hundred and ninety-eight Canadians died.

This, from a population, in 1917, of just eight million.

These were, for the most part, young men in their late teens and early twenties.

And supported by months of painstaking preparation.

Yet for all that, they still required courage – to a degree that is hard to fathom.

They advanced, fighting like lions, moving just behind a devastating allied artillery barrage.

But if you read the accounts of the men who fought here, you’ll find they focused on other things.

And they wrote about their fellow soldiers – those who’d fallen.

“The sun has been shining a couple times this last week,” reads a letter from William Henry Bell, dated April 7 th , 1917.

Say, that cake you sent was sure fine.” William Bell died at Vimy, April 10 th , 1917.

For in their ultimate sacrifice, these ordinary, yet extraordinary, men of the British dominion fought for the first time as the people of one country.

Side by side, united here at Vimy in the four divisions of the Canadian Corps.

It is by their sacrifice that Canada became an independent signatory to the Treaty of Versailles.

The sculpture of Canada Bereft is an emblem of a nation’s grief.

It’s an emblem of loving care – which evokes also the thousands of Canadian women who bravely answered the call, serving as nurses, or who provided critical support at home.

But this monument is also symbolic of Canada’s birth – and our enduring commitment to peace.

As I see the faces gathered here – veterans, caregivers, so many young people – I can’t help but feel a torch is being passed.

One hundred years later, we must say this, together.

Friends and honoured guests, let us hold to the grace of William Henry Bell.

To the grace of the ones who stood by their friends, through unimaginable hardship.

And who, in that offering, stood by their country.