Go to the translated article April 1, 2020 Ottawa, Ontario CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Hello everyone.

I want to start this morning by wishing everyone a happy Sikh Heritage Month.

Every day, Sikh Canadians make our cities and neighbourhoods stronger.

And right now, when people need help most, you’re stepping up once again.

In Regina, you’re delivering supplies to your neighbours, while in Mississauga, you’re donating to the Seva Food Bank.

It just goes to show that we are all stronger together, supporting each other.

To the people on the front lines, thank you: To farmers and truck drivers.

You are working day and night so that we can eat and take our medication.

You are protecting our health and the health of our families.

Our government has introduced a three-point economic plan to protect jobs, help people laid off, and support businesses.

If you’re worried about your job – we’re helping your employer keep you on the payroll with the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy.

Later today, Minister Morneau, Minister Ng, and Minister Bains will provide an update about this 75 per cent wage subsidy.

But what I can say now is that it’s going to be available for businesses, big and small, that are not publicly funded and have seen a 30 per cent or more decline in gross revenues.

That includes everything from bars and restaurants, to charities and non-profits.

Applications will soon open through the Canada Revenue Agency.

Employers will need to attest that they are doing everything they can to pay the remaining 25 per cent of people’s wages.

These are unprecedented times, and will require us to pull together as a country and trust each other as Canadians.

So there will be stiff and severe penalties for trying to take advantage of this system and of your fellow Canadians.

These are unprecedented times so we’re taking unprecedented action.

And while we put this measure in place, we’re continuing to move forward on the other two prongs of our economic plan.

To help business owners worried about rent or other bills, we’ve brought in new loans.

And to help people who lose their paycheck, whether they’re freelance or have been laid off, we created the Canada Emergency Response Benefit.

And on that front, I have some good news to share.

Starting April 6th, you will be able to apply for the Canada Emergency Response Benefit.

A reminder, if you’re getting the wage subsidy from your employer, you can’t collect the CERB.

For the CERB, you can register online at Canada.ca.

By selecting direct deposit, you should receive your payment within 3 to 5 days.

You can call the Canada Revenue Agency for help over the phone.

After applying, all you need to do to keep getting this benefit, is check in every month to say that you’re still out of work.

And if you’ve already applied through EI, you’re all set up.

We’re putting measures in place so that we don’t overload the system, but I can assure you that everyone will get their money.

Later today, Minister Duclos and Minister Qualtrough will have more details on this whole process, from eligibility to applying to getting your cheque.

But the bottom line is this: We’re getting you the help you need, when you need it.

We have a plan to protect jobs, to help those who have been laid off, and to support businesses that are having cash flow problems.

We’re going to keep working hard to make sure you’re getting the support you need.

This is the largest economic program in Canada’s history.

And so I’ve asked the House Leader and the Deputy Prime Minister to reach out to the other parties about bringing back Parliament.

Governments of all orders across the country are stepping up to fulfill their responsibilities to Canadians.

Canada hasn’t seen this type of civic mobilization since the Second World War.

These are the biggest economic measures in our lifetimes – to defeat a threat to our health.

These historic measures will support Canadians to stay home to defeat COVID-19.

We all have to answer the call of duty This is service that most of us have never been called upon to do.

We, each of us, have to live up to our end of the bargain.

We must fulfill our collective responsibility to each other.

So be smart about what you do, about the choices you make.

That is how you serve your country and how we will all serve each other.

How well we do this right now determines where our country will be in two weeks or in two months.

Where we find ourselves in a few weeks, in a few months, doesn’t depend on me: it depends on you.

I am calling on your civic conscience, to protect others.

If you do not follow the guidelines, you are putting others in danger.

We all have a moral obligation to take care of one another.

By remaining true to our values, we will remain true to who we are as Canadians.