Go to the translated article November 10, 2018 Vimy, France CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Good morning everyone.

It's an honour for me to get to share a few words with you.

101 years ago this year, 7,004 Canadians were injured in the battle that began here at Vimy Ridge.

Canada’s population numbered only 8 million at the time.

That was 100 years ago, but the realities of war – the tragic loss of those fallen in battle, the magnitude of sacrifice – transcend time.

Through your service, you carried – and continue to carry – the legacy of those who, 100 years ago, fought in the trenches of the First World War.

Through your bravery and dedication to your country, you honour the memory of the young men who died right here, on the battlefields of Vimy Ridge, and all service members who have paid the ultimate price.

Today, Canadians remember who you are, what you stand for, and the history you defined.

You stand for the values upon which Canada was built – values like democracy, equality, justice, and liberty.

And what I can barely know, you will never forget.

Many of you have watched your friends – your brothers and sisters – die in your arms.

You risked it all to help the most vulnerable and free the oppressed.

You chose to live your life in service of others, driven by a profound sense of duty.

And for that, Canadians can never thank you enough.

In times of war and in times of peace, Canadians have had the privilege to count on you – our brave Canadians in uniform.

On this centenary of the Armistice of the First World War, we think of all those who have fought with courage for the values ​​we hold dear.

Of the soldiers, past and present, who sacrificed their lives for their country.

I think of Canadians who pay tribute each day to the memory of Canadian Armed Forces members by choosing, in turn, to serve Canada.

Of their family and their friends who are also called upon to make profound sacrifices.

On behalf of all Canadians, thank you for everything you have done and continue to do for our country.