Go to the translated article April 18, 2020 Ottawa, Ontario CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Good morning, everyone.

I want to start today by confirming that Canada and the United States have agreed to extend by another 30 days the border measures that are currently in place.

This is an important decision, and one that will keep people on both sides of the border safe.

It’s another example of the excellent collaboration between our two countries, and I want to thank Minister Bill Blair for leading the discussions with the United States.

And usually, a Saturday morning in April means getting outside to enjoy the sunshine, having a friend over for coffee, or just taking the kids to the park.

We’re living through an unprecedented public health emergency, and we need to keep responding accordingly.

So even as the weather gets nicer, and even in the weeks to come as we start seeing hopeful news—we can’t let up.

Because if we do, we could lose the progress that we’ve made.

Later today, you may see some new ads with people you know, like Hayley Wickenheiser, Chris Hadfield, Dr.

Tam, Laurent Duvernay-Tardif, David Saint-Jacques and Dr.

And they’ll remind you to “stay home and save lives.” That’s how we keep each other safe.

Limit your trips to the grocery store to less than once a week.

If you do go out, keep two metres distance from each other.

And as you do your part, know that we’re here to support you.

Over the past few weeks, we announced historic measures to help you get through this crisis.

With the Emergency Benefit, the Wage Subsidy and loans to small businesses, we support millions of families and workers across the country.

So today, I am announcing further targeted support measures.

This morning, I am very happy to announce that the government will allocate more than $306 million to give Indigenous businesses the support they need.

This funding will be provided through Aboriginal Financial Institutions and administered by the National Aboriginal Capital Corporations Association.

It will allow Indigenous businesses to access short-term, interest-free loans and non-repayable contributions so they are better positioned to make it through and rebound after this crisis.

Today’s investment will help thousands of businesses bridge to better times, including many that are owned and run by Indigenous women.

These businesses employ people right across the country—in small communities and big cities alike.

So when we support them, we’re supporting families and workers, too.

And this is just a first step—we’ll have more to say soon on what else we’ll do to help Indigenous businesses, and the people who rely on them.

Small business owners are at the heart of so many communities.

And this is a tough time, whether you own a store, a restaurant, or are part of the hospitality sector.

With this new investment and with measures like the Canada Emergency Business Account, the wage subsidy, and the Canada Emergency Response Benefit—we’re focused on helping you.

But until it does, we need to be prepared to persevere.

And that includes ensuring that our frontline workers have the equipment and tools they need to do their jobs and stay safe.

Canada is continuing to receive shipments of personal protective equipment.

Yesterday, two planes full of N95 masks and coveralls arrived in Canada.

More shipments will be coming in this weekend and into next week, with additional medical supplies.

I can also announce that we will begin receiving deliveries of face shields from Toronto Stamp very soon.

They’ve shifted from their usual production of rubber stamps and ID badges, and will be providing millions of face shields over the next two months.

We all look forward to the time when this will be all over.

We all look forward to future Saturdays when we can see our friends or take our kids to a birthday party.

That day will come, but only if everyone keeps doing their part.