Go to the translated article January 8, 2020 Ottawa, Ontario CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Hello, everyone.

This morning, Canadians across the country were shocked and saddened to learn that a fatal plane crash outside of Tehran had claimed 176 innocent lives.

At least 63 Canadians were on board and a total of 138 passengers on that flight were connecting to Canada.

All people who won’t be coming home to their parents, their friends, their colleagues and their family.

All had so much potential, so much life ahead of them.

On behalf of all Canadians, I want to express my deepest condolences to those who are mourning the loss of a loved one.

While no words will erase your pain, I want you to know that an entire country is with you.

At the most tragic times, Canadians have a history of standing shoulder to shoulder.

To the communities that are mourning the loss of a loved one today – we will be there for you.

In the coming days and weeks, our government will continue to work closely with its partners to ensure that this crash is thoroughly investigated.

Canadians have questions, and they deserve answers.

Minister Champagne will be speaking with the Iranian foreign minister and conveying the need for a thorough investigation into this fatal crash.

Minister Champagne has spoken with the Government of Ukraine, the authorities involved and a number of our partners.

For his part, Minister Garneau is working closely with Transport Canada officials and has been in contact with his international counterparts.

Earlier today, I spoke with President Macron, Prime Minister Johnson, President Trump and Australian Prime Minister Morrison to discuss the matter.

They all expressed their deepest sympathies to the families and to all Canadians and offered their help and support.

These calls built on the conversations I’ve had over the past few days with Chancellor Merkel, NATO Secretary General Stoltenberg, EU Council President Charles Michel, and His Majesty the King of Jordan.

About an hour ago, a Ukrainian Airlines plane just landed in Toronto from Kyiv.

According to the airline, there were 138 passengers who weren’t on that flight because they died in the crash on the earlier leg of their travel.

There are a number of steps being taken to support the families at Pearson Airport.

Right now, our top priority remains the safety and security of all Canadians, may they be at home or abroad.

Friends and relatives of Canadians believed to be onboard should contact Global Affairs Canada’s 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre.

Canadian citizens in Iran requiring consular assistance should contact the Canadian Embassy in Ankara, Turkey.

To the families grieving, know that the Government of Canada and all Canadians are grieving with you.

We will support you in the incredibly difficult weeks and months ahead.

This sombre day comes in the wake of deeply concerning events in Iraq.

Canada condemns the missile attacks launched by Iran last night.

I am relieved, as are all Canadians, that all personnel deployed in Iraq are safe.

I’d like to take a moment to thank, once again, the women and men in uniform who have worked hard with our allies to stabilize Iraq and counter Daesh.

Their mission is important and we can all be proud of their work.

I assure you that we are taking all necessary precautions to ensure the safety of our civilian, military and diplomatic personnel.

We are in constant communication with our international partners, and are keeping the opposition parties informed of the situation as it evolves.

We continue to call for a de-escalation of tensions in the region as well as for dialogue.