The Security Dialogue this morning was based on the OSCE’s Code of Conduct, notably on the integration of women in the armed forces.

This statement covers another part of the Code – specifically paragraphs 30, 31 and 34 – which require States to ensure their armed forces operate fully in accordance with international law.

Reports from the UN and OSCE point to a pattern of deliberate attacks on civilians.

According to the latest ODIHR report “the Russian Federation armed forces further escalated the use of weapons with wide area effects in urban areas across Ukraine, in blatant disregard of IHL, including the principles of distinction and proportionality.” In January this year, the UN verified that civilian casualties for 2025 (14,656) were up 31% from 2024 and 70% from 2023.

It added that 63% of all civilian casualties in 2025 occurred in frontline areas.

Because older people are more likely to remain in these areas, they were disproportionately affected.

The UN reported that individuals aged 60 years and above accounted for over 45% of civilians killed in frontline areas in 2025, despite representing only 25% of the national population.

First-Person View drones are responsible for the majority of these civilian deaths and injuries.

The latest ODIHR report noted “a continued escalation of the use of short-range loitering munitions, including so-called ‘First Person View’ (FPV) drones, by the Russian armed forces, which remained the leading cause of civilian casualties near the frontline.” According to the UN, civilian casualties caused by short-range drones increased by 120 per cent in 2025 – with 577 civilians killed and 3,288 injured.

The UN documented one case, on 25 December, where a short-range drone struck a car with volunteers conducting evacuations in Kostiantynivka, Donetsk region, killing one humanitarian worker and injuring two others.

According to the Head of the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine: “The high number of civilian casualties resulting from FPV drone attacks suggests that these weapons have been deployed in ways that violate international humanitarian law, in particular the principles of distinction and precaution.

In some instances, drone operators appear to have intentionally attacked civilians or civilian objects, including medical transport and personnel, which would amount to war crimes.” Expanding missile attacks now also pose a growing risk to civilians.

On 19 November a single missile strike on an apartment building in Ternopil killed 38 civilians.

Russia is now launching an average of over 180 missiles at Ukraine per month, largely targeted and energy and critical infrastructure.

Madam Chair, the United Kingdom reiterates its call on the Russian Federation to cease its unlawful attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure; to comply fully with international law; and to honour in good faith the commitments it has freely undertaken within the OSCE.