First, the UK is deeply concerned about events in North-East Syria.

This is a critical moment for Syria’s future and we are watching developments closely.

We call for adherence to the ceasefire agreement, continued dialogue and an end to violence.

It is essential that all parties focus on protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure; and unimpeded humanitarian access both within Syria and across borders.

Second, we are alarmed by reports that Daesh fighters have escaped from detention facilities in North-East Syria.

A robust transition plan for securing and managing the camps and detention facilities is critical and we encourage close international co-ordination to mitigate any shared national security risks.

Third, the fighting seen throughout January brings has repercussions for an already difficult humanitarian situation.

Tens of thousands of Syrians have been displaced and their access to essential infrastructure – including water, food supplies, internet and electricity- has been severely disrupted.

Access for humanitarian organisations must be facilitated, and aid allowed to reach those in need without obstruction.

The UK is providing life-saving humanitarian assistance to those affected by the violence and displacement in North-East Syria, where it is safe to do so and where access allows.

UK aid is supporting hospitals, clinics and the deployment of medical teams alongside the provision of food, shelter, winter supplies and cash transfers.

Colleagues, the Syrian people deserve peace and stability.

The UK strongly supports an inclusive political transition that guarantees rights and protections for all communities and delivers for all Syrians.

We welcome the commitments of the Syrian Government in this regard.

Respect for diverse identities and inclusive, representative governance are essential pillars for long-term stability and prosperity - and for a safer, more secure future for Syria.

As we look towards a renewed UN-Syria relationship in the year ahead, I encourage this Council to offer their collective support to ensure that Syria remains on the path towards a more stable and peaceful future.