Thank you, Madame Deputy Speaker. Can I begin by expressing my condolences to all those affected by the terrible train crash near Córdoba last night.
Thank you to the Spanish emergency services who responded overnight and throughout today.
I am sure the House will join me in thinking of the people of Spain at this distressing time.
With permission Madame Deputy Speaker I will make a statement on Greenland and wider Arctic security.
On the evening of Saturday 17 January, President Trump announced the intention to impose 10% tariffs on goods from Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the UK over the future of Greenland.
This is a serious moment for our transatlantic discussions and partnerships so let me outline to the House the UK’s response which rests on three key principles.
First, Greenland is part of the Kingdom of Denmark. Its future is a matter for the Greenlanders and the Danes, and them alone.
This reflects the fundamental principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity to which this whole House is committed.
Second, the use, or the threat, of tariffs against allies in this way is completely wrong. It is unwarranted and it is counterproductive.
Third, Arctic security is a shared concern - and a shared responsibility – for both sides of the Atlantic. It can only be effectively addressed and maintained through cooperation between transatlantic allies, and crucially through NATO.
So instead of divisions that only aid our adversaries, we now need a serious and constructive dialogue about our Arctic security, which is built on respect for sovereignty and collective security and the rules which underpin our alliance.
As the Prime Minister set out this morning the north star for the Government’s foreign policy is to stand up for the UK’s national interest, to defend and advance Britain’s security, Britain’s prosperity and Britain’s values.
And we do so through the alliances and partnerships that we build abroad that make us stronger here at home – including alliances where that transatlantic cooperation between Europe and North America has long been vital.
As the Prime Minister has made clear, our close and deep- rooted partnership with the United States is a hugely important part of our security and our prosperity.
The depth of our cooperation on intelligence sharing and defence helps keeps us safe.
And our trading relationship and the new agreements we have reached in the last twelve months are driving billions of pounds of investment in the UK, supporting jobs across the country.
But the Prime Minister has also made clear that we will be very direct about our differences – as he was in speaking to President Trump yesterday.
Because standing up for the UK national interest means defending the principles that underpin stable and enduring international cooperation. That means respect for sovereignty and it means respect for long standing allies.
Denmark is a close ally of the United Kingdom and the United States.
Indeed, Demark has long been one of the US’s closest allies.
A proud NATO member that has stood shoulder to shoulder with the UK and with the US including at real human cost in recent decades.
Rooted in that partnership, the US already has in place a 1951 Treaty with Denmark which already provides for an extensive US security presence in Greenland.
And alliances endure because they are built on respect and partnership, not pressure.
Tariff threats like this are no way to treat allies.
Madame Deputy Speaker, the tariff threat has come following the pre-coordinated preparations for the annual Danish programme of activities under the framework “Arctic Endurance,” which is focused on addressing Russian security threats in the Arctic.
And last week, at the request of the Danish Government, one UK military officer currently based in Denmark joined a planning group visit, in an observational capacity.
These sorts of visits are a regular part of military planning ahead of exercises and operations.
Work amongst allies to strengthen Greenland’s security that should be recognised for its importance, not used as a reason to impose economic pressure.
A trade war would hurt workers and businesses on both sides of the Atlantic.
It would be in no one’s interest.
Both sides of the Atlantic should be working together on Arctic security, not moving apart.
And that is why the Prime Minister and this Government are working intensively in the UK national interest to prevent this happening and to reach a resolution.
Yesterday the Prime Minister spoke directly with President Trump, with the Danish Prime Minister and other close allies and international leaders.
Today I welcomed the Danish Foreign Minister Lars Rasmussen here in London for valuable discussions and the Europe Minister has been in touch with the Greenland Foreign Minister.
I have also been direct contact with the US, Canada, France, Germany and other European colleagues.
And on Wednesday, my Right Honourable Friend the Defence Secretary will visit Denmark.
We will continue with this urgent diplomacy, in pursuit of the principles that I have set out.
And we will also argue for the strengthening of our multilateral cooperation around Arctic security.
Because the Arctic is the gateway for Russia’s northern fleet to threaten Britain, Western Europe and North America- threats to undersea cables, threats to critical national infrastructure.
We have seen greater presence of Russian ships and submarines making their way to the North Atlantic.
We have seen Russian aircraft testing our air defence.
As Shadow Fleet vessels pass through our waters, trying to evade our sanctions and continuing to fund the war in Ukraine.
Northern Norway, Finland, sea routes through Greenland-Iceland-UK gaps have long been strategically significant when considering Russian threats.
And we know that the strategic significance of the Arctic is likely to grow as the melting of Arctic ice stands to open new routes through the Arctic Ocean and with newfound geo-economic competition for critical minerals and rare earths.
So Arctic security is crucial not just to the UK but to the entire NATO Alliance.
Of the eight countries north of the Arctic Circle, seven are NATO Allies.
So across our alliance, working together we can and should do more.
So that is why last week I travelled to Finland and Norway to discuss the threats they currently face.
My Right Honourable Friend the Defence Secretary was also in Sweden.
In Helsinki, I met with the Finnish Foreign Minister and was briefed on their border force activities to tackle a Russian ship that had damaged undersea cables between Finland and Estonia.
In Northern Norway, I met with the Norwegian Foreign Minister. We signed a new agreement to strengthen our cooperation to tackle Russia’s shadow fleet.
And we travelled together to Camp Viking to see the work of the Royal Marines and their Norwegian partners.
In the bitter cold of this unforgiving landscape, our Commando forces are training and exercising- preparing for contingencies.
For more than 50 years, the Royal Marines have trained in the Norwegian Arctic.
But we are increasing that commitment, doubling the number of marines there from 1,000 to 2,000 in the space of three years. And I pay tribute to the phenomenal work that they do.
Alongside the landmark Lunna House Defence Agreement that will see the UK and Norway jointly operate a new fleet of Type 26 anti-submarine warfare frigates to hunt Russian submarines and protect our critical undersea infrastructure.
And in the Autumn, the UK-led Joint Expeditionary Force saw thousands of troops, including over 1,700 British personnel, dozens of ships, vehicles and aircraft deployed from the Baltics to Iceland.
The UK plans to contribute to a range of exercises in the North Atlantic and High North throughout 2026.
Because this is how we believe we best strengthen our Arctic security for the sake of both Western Europe and North America-   together- through alliances and partnerships, not through threats on tariffs or sovereignty that simply undermine our collective security.
So Madame Deputy Speaker, I welcome the messages of cross-Party unity and the shared conviction that the future of Greenland must be determined by the Greenlanders and the Danes.
And whether it be on Greenland, on tariffs, or on wider Arctic security, we are clear in our views, firm in our principles and steadfast in our commitment to safeguarding UK interests.
The UK will continue to pursue constructive ways forward, collaborating intensively with partners and allies.
And pursuing our security, our prosperity and our values every step of the way.
I commend this Statement to the House.