Go to the translated article
November 10, 2018
Vimy, France
CHECK AGAINST
DELIVERY
Good morning everyone.
First of all, I want to thank you for being here. It's an honour for me to get to share a few words with you.
101 years ago this year, 7,004 Canadians were injured in the battle that began here at Vimy Ridge.
3,598 Canadians would never return home. Canada’s population numbered only 8 million at the time.
That was 100 years ago, but the realities of war – the tragic loss of those fallen in battle, the magnitude of sacrifice – transcend time.
You know that better than anyone.
Through your service, you carried – and continue to carry – the legacy of those who, 100 years ago, fought in the trenches of the First World War.
Through your bravery and dedication to your country, you honour the memory of the young men who died right here, on the battlefields of Vimy Ridge, and all service members who have paid the ultimate price.
Today, Canadians remember who you are, what you stand for, and the history you defined.
A history for which you bled and fought.
A history built on your sacrifice.
Thank you.
You stand for the values upon which Canada was built – values like democracy, equality, justice, and liberty.
And what I can barely know, you will never forget.
Many of you have watched your friends – your brothers and sisters – die in your arms.
You risked it all to help the most vulnerable and free the oppressed.
You chose to live your life in service of others, driven by a profound sense of duty.
And for that, Canadians can never thank you enough.
In times of war and in times of peace, Canadians have had the privilege to count on you – our brave Canadians in uniform.
Time and again, we have counted on your courage. On your dedication. On your generosity.
We all owe you an enormous debt of gratitude.
On this centenary of the Armistice of the First World War, we think of all those who have fought with courage for the values ​​we hold dear.
Of the soldiers, past and present, who sacrificed their lives for their country.
I think of Canadians who pay tribute each day to the memory of Canadian Armed Forces members by choosing, in turn, to serve Canada.
I think of their children. Of their loved ones. Of their family and their friends who are also called upon to make profound sacrifices.
I think of you and your families.
You make us proud.
On behalf of all Canadians, thank you for everything you have done and continue to do for our country.
We are eternally grateful to you.
From the bottom of our hearts, thank you.