Go to the translated article
November 26, 2016
Antananarivo, Madagascar
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Hello, Everyone.
It is a real pleasure for me to be with you today—as Prime Minister of Canada, but especially as a proud Francophone.
I would like to thank the President of the Republic of Madagascar and the Malagasy people for their warm welcome. I would also like to mention that the President studied at a Canadian university, the Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières. So his background is an indication of the wide variety of ties that are being formed between the countries and citizens of the Francophone world.
I would also like to thank my good friend, the Secretary General and former Governor General of Canada, Michaëlle Jean, for her great work at the head of the International Organisation of La Francophonie. Michaëlle, your leadership is a source of pride for all Canadians.
The IOF is an organization that is making an important contribution in a constantly changing world, through its actions and its shared values.
For Canadians, membership in La Francophonie is based on a common language, history and culture that unite us from one end of our vast nation to the other. And it is also a window into a rich and diverse world, with plenty of differences, but united in its values and aspirations.
And so, although many challenges remain, there are also many opportunities.
The countries of Africa play a central role in La Francophonie.
As you know, Africa is the continent with the youngest population in the world. This represents boundless potential for its countries, but for also for Canada, which is re‑engaging with Africa to be a reliable long-term partner.
As a father and as the minister responsible for Youth, I take every opportunity to remind people that our youth are not the leaders of tomorrow, they are already the leaders of today!
Our challenge is to give them a strong voice, to listen to them and to incorporate their viewpoints in our decisions. Our challenge is also to give them and subsequent generations a clean and healthy environment by providing the means to actively combat pollution and climate change. One way to do this is by implementing the Paris Agreement.
Young people today are citizens of the world—they want to discover, learn, broaden their horizons. They are open‑minded and have a thirst for freedom and equality that no other generation before them has matched.
So let’s let them contribute!
All of us must also ensure that women and girls are given their rightful place.
I am a feminist. And I am extremely proud of that.
Women and girls have a key role to play in politics, in business, in conflict resolution and in peacekeeping. They must fully participate in society. And it is not just up to women to speak out, but we men need to as well. It is our fight, too.
Because when women and girls succeed, we all reap the benefits.
But for women to succeed, we must first ensure that their human rights are respected. The right to live without violence, the right to free choice in matters of their sexual and reproductive health, the right to equality, and the right to participate fully and completely in society.
And yet, these rights are still violated far too often. Women and girls are victims of physical and sexual violence. They are married off, often at a young age, without their consent. They cannot freely and safely access abortion. They are subjected to genital mutilation.
Enough! There is no excuse for such practices, for such violations of their human rights. All of us together, women and men, have the duty to create the conditions that women and girls need to reach their full potential.
Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities are suffering in too many countries, including in some member countries of La Francophonie here today. We owe them the same respect, the same rights and the same dignity as we give all other members of our society.
We are faced with other challenges, too, the foremost being the threat of radicalization and violent extremism.
We know now that isolated or marginalized individuals are more likely to become radicalized or fall into the grips of extremist groups. Conversely, people who feel included, valued and fully appreciated have a much greater chance of making a positive contribution to society.
Therefore, to prevent radicalization, we must implement prevention strategies. This includes creating a society where diversity is celebrated and where we maintain an ongoing dialogue with members of minority communities.
And because too often our young people are more vulnerable to radicalization, we must do more for them, by offering all young people the vocational training they need so they can enter the job market and help their society thrive.
We often have discussions regarding issues of identity. Canadian identity is built upon the values of diversity, inclusion and democracy. These values are at the very core of our success. They contribute to strengthening and growing our middle class.
We are a multicultural country with two official languages, and we are as proud of our shared values as we are of our differences. Our languages and cultures are a window to the world for our children and those who choose to make Canada home.
I would like to share a few words now, in English, with my Anglophone counterparts, who have embraced the bilingual nature of our country.
Canada’s character as a bilingual country is part of its very fabric. It teaches us every day to be stronger, more open. And Canada’s participation in La Francophonie provides us with a unique platform to promote our values of openness and diversity as well as our agenda of empowerment for all.
Today, we, the Francophones of Canada, are a vital part of this open and plural society. And it is why we are ready to play a leading role within the international Francophone community.
We have the proof right before us, as Canadians are represented at this Summit not only by the federal government, but also by the governments of Quebec and New-Brunswick. These governments have been long active within the Canadian and international Francophonie, and they have provided outstanding leadership.
The Government of Ontario is now seeking to join the IOF as an observer, which we are all very proud of. Ontario, home to some 600,000 Francophones and millions of francophiles, will certainly make a major contribution to the organization. Canada stands firm behind Ontario’s candidacy and urges all IOF members to do the same.
As a Quebecer, I would also like to applaud the ongoing efforts of the Quebec government to protect and promote the French language. It has gone beyond defending our beautiful language. Not only has the Quebec government ensured the bilingual nature of Canada, but it has also been crucial to the vitality and strength of our language at home and abroad.
We are here for our Francophone communities in Canada and here for Francophones and francophiles across the globe.
We are determined to strengthen the ties that we already have. We are committed to forging new bonds with countries that share our vision of a better, more just world.
My friends, we need to bring about the positive change we want to see. It is our role to share our values with the other Francophone and francophile societies.
The 21
st
century belongs to us if, together, we are prepared to take on the challenges that we face.
The opportunities open to us are unprecedented; it is up to us to grasp them.
Member countries have a crucial role to play in the legacy that we will leave our children and grandchildren.
By offering a helping hand now, we can meet their expectations and their eagerness:   for a better world that we can build on together in the future.
Thank you