Madam Chair, the United Kingdom reaffirms its unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity. Our thoughts today are especially with the Ukrainian civilians killed and injured over the weekend, including those who died when Russian drones reportedly struck a commuter bus in the Dnipropetrovsk region, an attack that Ukraine’s emergency services reported killed between 12 and 15 workers returning from their shift. These latest civilian deaths underscore the brutal human cost of Russia’s ongoing aggression. We strongly denounce this most recent assault, consistent with the repeated and unacceptable actions we have witnessed from the Russian Federation.
Meanwhile, we welcomed the US efforts to negotiate a ceasefire on strikes against energy infrastructure, which could have been an opportunity to set conditions for more meaningful negotiations. Russia has continued to launch strikes across Ukraine. 
Overnight on 2-3 February, when Kyiv was reportedly colder than the North Pole, Russia launched a massive combined attack with drones and over 70 missiles. This struck eight cities, including Kyiv, and energy facilities.  Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians have been left without heating with temperatures reaching -24 degrees. We condemn these inhumane attacks. The legal position is clear: attacks expected to disproportionately harm civilians or cause unnecessary suffering violate international humanitarian law. Respecting the principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution is not optional or a goodwill gesture.  It is the bare minimum required. Whereas Russia continues to launch relentless and egregious attacks against its neighbour, Ukraine has consistently demonstrated its readiness to engage seriously in the pursuit of peace. It is the Russian Federation that should signal it is prepared to choose diplomacy over continued destruction.
Here in Vienna, we remain seriously concerned about the continued misinformation and false narratives Russia is delivering in this Forum - narratives which independent reporting by international experts, Ukrainian authorities, and even prominent Russian prowar commentators consistently contradict. Russia claims that it wishes the FSC to function effectively, but its behaviour tells a different story:
For example, in this forum, Russia has alleged it has established total control over Kupiansk. This is demonstrably false. Independent verification highlights that Russia has not gained control of these cities thanks to Ukrainian counterattacks. Russia has provided no verifiable evidence or substantiating material to support their claims of territorial gains when challenged. Russia’s refusal to engage in constructive dialogue, its failure to answer direct and reasonable questions, and its avoidance of discussion even when confronted with clear contradictory evidence do not reflect the actions of a State committed to upholding the integrity of this Forum.
The United Kingdom will continue to counter disinformation when it appears in this Forum and will consistently return to facts established by a broad spectrum of independent analysts and experts, not Russia’s state funded propaganda. If the Russian Federation genuinely wishes to see a functioning, credible, and effective FSC, it must engage in good faith. But the FSC cannot function effectively based on evasion, unverifiable claims and misinformation. Our mandate, which includes essential risk management, depends heavily on being able to assess what is fact and what is not – which is hard to do when we are seemingly swamped with deliberate misinformation. The United Kingdom will continue to engage in good faith in all our collective interests, and we would invite the Russian Federation to do the same. Thank you, Madam Chair.