I will make three points today.
First, we note the landmark conviction of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
This first conviction from a Security Council referral, and the first addressing Darfur crimes in 2003-2004, sends a clear message that perpetrators of international crimes will be held accountable, no matter how long it takes.
We further note the Office’s engagement with victims and affected communities, and the significance of this judgment as the first ICC conviction for gender persecution.
Second, and turning to recent events. As my Foreign Secretary has said, 9 January marked a grim milestone of 1,000 days of devastating violent conflict in Sudan. This has pushed millions into famine.
The UK has repeatedly condemned the violence perpetrated by both the RSF and the Sudanese Armed Forces. We support efforts to combat impunity and hold perpetrators of alleged international crimes to account.
We therefore welcome the Office’s investigations into atrocity crimes in Al Geneina and are deeply concerned by the Office’s findings in relation to El Fasher.
The RSF’s October takeover has brought horrific reports of alleged mass killings, targeting of specific ethnic groups, and the use of rape as a weapon of war.
The displacement of over 107,000 people only serves to underline the catastrophic humanitarian impact of these developments.
We urge all parties to cease hostilities, protect civilians as demanded by this Council in resolution 2736, and allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access.
Third, cooperation remains critical.
We welcome steps by the Sudanese authorities, including recent engagements in The Hague, as well as the enhanced cooperation referenced in the Office of the Prosecutor’s report.
It is important that these welcome commitments lead to action. This includes the arrest and surrender of ICC suspects: Omar Al Bashir, Abdel Raheem Hussein, and Ahmad Harun. We deeply regret the RSF’s failure to engage with the Office.
We encourage States and regional bodies to assist the ICC by sharing satellite imagery, enabling witness interviews, and providing evidence via the OTP Link platform.
Lastly, we welcome enhanced cooperation between the Office and the AU Fact Finding Mission and recognise the vital role played by civil society organisations in supporting investigations and advancing accountability.
President, impunity risks fueling cycles of violence. Accountability must go hand in hand with efforts to end the conflict and deliver peace.
We reaffirm our strong support for the ICC and its independence; we do not support sanctioning individuals or organisations associated with the Court.
Mr President, the Sudanese people deserve justice, and we welcome the ongoing role of the ICC in achieving that goal.